CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any (Moonshaes)
FREQUENCY: Unique
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 15
HIT DICE: 16 (120 hp)
THAC0: 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: 4
DAMAGE/ATTACKS: 1d12(×2)/3d10/1d8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 60%
SIZE: G (18' tall, 50' long)
MORALE: Fearless (19)
XP Value: 19,000

In its true form, Kazgaroth resembles a huge tyrannosaur
with forelimbs that, while still short, match
the rest of its body and allow the Beast to run on all
fours if it wishes. When traveling in this manner,
consider Kazgaroth's movement rate to be 18.
The Beast possesses a broad, powerful, scaly body
and tail with a maw that drips mildly acidic saliva
(the acid is taken into account in the bite's damage).
Its massive hindlegs end in heavy, clawed feet. In
this form (and in other forms if the Beast loses selfcontrol),
Kazgaroth's beady eyes glow a fierce red.


Combat: While the Beast prefers to engage its
foes through trickery, deceit, and the use of mortal
pawns, Kazgaroth revels in the bloodlust of combat
when it arises. In this form, the Beast attacks with its
two clawed forelimbs and its vicious bite. Further,
the Beast uses its tail to attack anyone it finds itself
in melee with; damage from the tailslap is 1d8. Any
being struck by the tail must make a Dexterity check
with a -5 penalty or be knocked off his feet. The
prone figure can regain his footing in the following
or subsequent rounds, but can take no other actions
during that round.

Kazgaroth can be struck in combat only by magical
weapons of +2 enchantment or better. The
Beast's Magic Resistance applies to all wizard and
priest spells, except those cast by neutral clerics
whose powers concern maintaining the balance of
nature. For example, spells cast by druids or priests of
Chauntea would affect Kazgaroth normally.

The Beast can shapechange at will. Kazgaroth has
been known to assume forms such as a bull, a snake,
and a gargoylelike creature. Kazgaroth also can assume
the form of specific, well-known individuals,
such as it did with the Northmen king Thelgaar
Ironhand, after the Beast consumes the original
being. Kazgaroth cannot assume the form of any
creature larger than itself-but then, it really doesn't
need to.

Kazgaroth also possesses several special abilities,
the first of which is the ability to constantly detect
magic and detect invisibility within 100 yards of itself,
limited by vision. The second ability is to cause lycanthropy
with its bite. The breed of lycanthrope
matches the ethical element of the victim's alignment
(lawful, neutral, or chaotic), but is always evil.
Therefore, lawful (good, neutral, or evil) victims
could become wererats, neutral (good, true neutral,
or evil) might become werebats, and chaotic (good,
neutral, or evil) individuals may become werewolves
(or werefoxes if the victim is female and has elf
blood). Kazgaroth can cast a permanent charm on one
victim within 10' of itself. A side effect of this charm
is that once per week, the charmed being must
successfully save vs. spell or permanently lose a point
of Charisma (to a minimum score of 3), due to the
effects of the Beast's vile magic on the being. Once
per week, the Beast also can cast a death spell.

Kazgaroth's final offensive power is perhaps its
most insidious. A corrupted form of the mass charm
spell, this ability transforms a troop (up to 500 persons)
of living beings into the undead minions of
Bhaal known as the Blood Warriors. See their entry
in this section for more details on their most recent
incarnation, the Blood Riders.

Kazgaroth is an integral component of the Moonshae
Isles (see “Ecology” below) and if slain, returns
in 3d6 years. Only the now-lost sword of Cymrych
Hugh could permanently kill the Beast.


Habitat/Society: Kazgaroth is unique to the
Moonshae Isles. With his shapechange ability, the
Beast can assume forms that allow him to travel anywhere
in the Isles quickly and unobtrusively.

Kazgaroth is venerated by the firbolg giants of the
Isles. These variants of “traditional” firbolgs use the
normal statistics for their race, but they are chaotic
neutral in alignment and are misshapen and unrelentingly
ugly. Under the Beast's leadership, these
powerful creatures did much evil to the good Ffolk of
the Moonshae Isles (see “History” below).


Ecology: As a supernatural creature, Kazgaroth
draws power from the death, decay, and corruption it
causes. In its most recent appearance, this power was
mainly derived from a Bhaal-corrupted Moonwell,
one of the sites sacred to the Earthmother and her
druids. It is from this same Darkwell that Bhaal's
avatar later entered the Realms, only to be defeated
by Tristan Kendrick, Newt the faerie dragon, and the
other heroes of the Moonshae Isles. Beyond this link
to the mortal world of the Realms, the Beast plays
no role in the life of the Moonshaes beyond being a
tool with which to upset the Balance of the Earthmother
's domain.

History: The origin of Kazgaroth the Beast lurks
in the long-lost past of the Moonshaes, nearly as distant as that of the Earthmother herself. Over the
centuries, Kazgaroth has arisen many times to upset
the Balance and wreak havoc across the Isles.
In 1345 DR, the Beast made his last recorded appearance.
Born again into the Realms from the
Bhaal-corrupted Moonwell (now called the Darkwell),
Kazgaroth set his plans into motion. Calling
upon the firbolgs to begin depredations of their own,
Kazgaroth became wise in the ways of the Ffolk,
using his shape-shifting ability to pass unnoticed
amongst them.
Making his way to Myrloch Vale, the Beast corrupted
the druid Trahern of Oakvale, making the
hapless mortal a minion of Bhaal. Through the
druid, Kazgaroth was able to learn the druids' plan to
counteract the Beast's own plans to destroy the Balance.
The Beast first killed and took the form of a
woman named Meredith, then used this attractive
shape to seduce and infect the guardsman Erian with
lycanthropy. The werewolf that Erian would now become
also would serve Kazgaroth and Bhaal.
Next, the Beast viciously killed and began impersonating
Thelgaar Ironhand, the mightiest king of
the Northmen that lived on the Isles. Now in the
role of this leader, Kazgaroth revoked Ironhand's
previous peace-loving policies and built the assembled
Northmen into a conquering army bent on ravaging
the island of Gywnneth, home of the Kendrick
line of kings. Kazgaroth also used its corrupting mass
charm ability to transform the Northmen's only cavalry
unit, the Blood Riders, into his pawns. Meanwhile,
the Beast's firbolgs fed tons of coal into the
Darkwell, further polluting it. The giants also captured
Kamerynn, one of the Earthmother's Children.
Kazgaroth, as Ironhand, sailed forth with its
Northman army in specially modified longships.
Each vessel now carried a heavy, piercing ram on its
bow, for the Beast knew another of the Earthmother
's Children, the Leviathan, would sense its
presence and seek to end the blight Kazgaroth's presence
brought. Indeed, the great aquatic mammal
sunk a full third of Kazgaroth's duped Northmen
fleet, but eventually succumbed to the rams and a
huge harpoon hurled by Ironhand/the Beast itself.
Power flowed into Kazgaroth from the destruction of
the Leviathan, and the Beast now fought to control
the human form which was barely capable of holding
such potency.
Kazgaroth/Ironhand sailed on while part of the
Northman fleet sailed a different route, landing on Gwynneth and looting and pillaging, driving a great
mass of refugees before them. Part of the Beast's plan
was for a portion of the Northman army to use
mountain passes (guided by Trahern) to get ahead of
the refugees and slaughter them all between the two
Northman groups.

Meanwhile, Erian the werewolf fought and defeated
the leader of the Earthmother's Pack, a gathering
of all the wolves of the Isles. Erian then used
this collective Child of the Earthmother against her.
Soon, Kazgaroth landed his fleet at Corwell, laying
siege to both the town and Caer Corwell that overlooked
it.

Kazgaroth could sense the presence of the heroes
within the Caer, especially Robyn, the young
woman who was discovering her considerable
druidic powers. The Beast attacked, but the young
druid, a cleric named Friar Nolan, and Prince Tristan
Kendrick forced Kazgaroth to flee. Tristan Kendrick's
moorhound, Canthus, blessed by the Earthmother,
managed to defeat and kill Erian and he led the Pack
on a long trek to Corwell.

Now, the Northmen, the firbolgs, the Blood Riders,
and Kazgaroth worked to bring Corwell to its
knees. The heroes of the Moonshaes, however, stood
firm. The heroes turned back the firbolgs at the
Caer's gatehouse and, enraged at the sight, Kazgaroth
's control snapped. Resuming his true form,
the Beast slew the fleeing giant-kin with a blast of
magic, then managed to regain Thelgaar Ironhand's
form. As the Pack led by Canthus fiercely attacked
the Northmen army, Tristan Kendrick and Kazgaroth/
Ironhand met in battle. The Beast could not
stand the touch of the sword of Cymrych Hugh and
fled the field while one of the Blood Riders made off
with the young druid, Robyn, whom he intended to
sacrifice to his dread lord, Bhaal.

The heroes pursued the Blood Riders and managed
to prevent the sacrifice, defeating them in the
process. Reunited, the heroes tracked the Beast
back to the Darkwell where they engaged him in
battle. Strengthened by the Darkwell, Kazgaroth
killed most of the heroes before Tristan, wielding
the sword of Cymrych Hugh, destroyed the Beast.

The Earthmother returned all but one of her heroes
to life after the battle, but the Beast too lived
on, after a fashion. The heart of Kazgaroth, a black,
stonelike object of potent magical powers was recovered
by Trahern and eventually found its way into
the hands of HOBARTH, a powerful cleric of Bhaal.